Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane. Howard Waldrop is a science fiction writer
whose stories began appearing in the early 1970s, and he's written some
remarkably good ones. His reputation as one of science fiction's finest short
story writers is growing. Waldrop's The Ugly Chickens won a Nebula Award in
1981, and God's Hooks was a 1983 Nebula finalist. Ike at the Mike is a 1983 Hugo
finalist. Waldrop wrote for fanzines as a teenager, but finally he was inspired
to write science fiction. Here he tells us what inspired him. Well, actually, if
you want to know, everybody has a story like this, but I read Lin Carter's
Wizard of Lemuria, and I said if he can get that published, I can write, I can
get that, you know, I can get my stuff published. You know, it's real obvious.
Like, I mean, everybody I think has a story about that. They read something
after they've been reading this stuff for 20 years. They finally read something
that just pushes their buttons and says, that's garbage, you know, and I can
write better than that. Even when you're 18 years old, you say, I can write
better than that. And you set out to prove it, and a lot of people set out to
prove it, write a story, and like submit it or don't submit it, just write the
story to prove they can write a story, you know, and I'd already been writing a
story, so essentially is I got serious.
Waldrop's first professional sale was a story called Lunchbox. We asked him how
he initially got published. Essentially, I had been trying to get published
since 1966, been serious about it, 65 and 66, and I'd been publishing in
fanzines all along, stories in fanzines, and I just kept sending the stories out
until finally one of them sold. I mean, there was no problem breaking in as
such. I mean, it wasn't like a conscious thing saying, this is the one I'm going
to break in with or I'm going to write a story to break in. It was just I'd been
sending them out and getting them back until one day I sent one out and it
didn't come back, you know. Check came back. And that's, you know, it was like
I'd been writing for fanzines all along and comic scripts and things like that.
And the story just came. I mean, when it was time for it to sell, it sold.
Lunchbox details the fate of the first Viking lander shortly after it touches
down on Mars. Since the story was written prior to the actual Viking landing but
was published after the landing took place, we asked Waldrop if any changes had
to be made in the interim. I sold that story in 1969, or not in 69, in 70, and I
sold it four days, or I got the letter four days after I was drafted in the
Army. And, but because John Campbell, it was sold analog, and because John
Campbell died in the meantime and everything was in an uproar at Street &
Smith for about, or Condé Nast for six months or so, Ben Bova wrote me a letter
in 1972 and said, I'm changing all, originally it was called Voyager. If you
remember, the Viking stuff was all called Voyager, and the whole story was
talking about the Voyager lander and all this kind of stuff. And Ben Bova wrote
and says, it's okay if I change Voyager to Viking so he won't look like a jerk.
And I said, why sure, Ben, you know, anything you want. And, you know, because
the technology, they changed the, they changed the term, you know, the
terminology in the meantime. And, you know, I'd been in the Army, and what was
that? You know, I was guarding PXs and stuff, you know, and, you know, I hadn't
been kept up on the change in terminology in the meantime, you know, but yes, it
was, it preceded, there were several prototype models of the, essentially what
became the Viking lander, all competing for the contract in the late 60s. And
the Voyager thing was one of them, and I've got a picture I visited Langley for
one of the mock-ups of the original Voyager thing, which was slightly, it looked
much the same as the Viking eventually was, but had, you know, longer arm and
all this kind of stuff, you know. But, anyway, yeah, it preceded the program, so
that's why, you know, the change to Viking was, you know, like, fitted into the
story. More with Howard Waldrop on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and Bill Vernon. Science fiction writer Howard Waldrop
collaborated with several writers on short stories in the 1970s, including
Stephen Utley, Buddy Saunders, George Proctor, and George Martin. We asked
Waldrop why these collaborations took place. There was a group of us, and we
all, it's amazing that it happened. We were all from Texas, living in Texas, and
we all published our first story within like six or eight months of each other.
It was amazing. It just happened that way. And we all got to meet each other at
conventions within like six months of our first stories being published. And we
were all writing at the same time. We were all serious about this stuff. We were
going to take over. And one of the ways we did it was we started collaborating
with each other. And we'd do stories on our own, but then we'd also do stories
that we couldn't do on our own with the other people. And it wasn't a conscious
effort on anybody's part. I think it's just one of those things that just
happened. You know, we were just all writing at the same time. We were all right
there. Like Buddy was my landlord. You know, he owned one half of Duplex and I
was in the other. And he, of course, he got me into comics fandom ten years
before that anyway. And some of us were friends. Some of us met each other and
became friends and things like that. And it's just that we just sparked each
other, you know. If you had something you were doing and you got through with it
and you weren't quite ready to do something else, you could always, you know, do
a collaboration with Buddy or with Proctor or with, you know, anything like
that. And, like, we just, there must have been, in a space of about two years,
there must have been 35 or 40 stories come out of the various collaborations,
you know, two and sometimes three-way collaborations with people, you know. It
was amazing. And it's amazing that it happened. And it's amazing that we got so
much done on our own, too, besides doing all that.
One of these collaborations, A Voice and Bitter Weeping, written with Buddy
Saunders, was expanded to a novel, The Texas-Israeli War, 1999. We asked Waldrop
how this transformation occurred. We originally wrote that story before I'd sold
Lunchbox, even. Buddy and I did this 10,000-word novella, or novelette, in
alternate chapters, like, you know, as in the novel, as in the first, like, 50
pages of the novel. We tried to sell that thing everywhere, and it would not
sell. You know, it got up to the point where the battleship, the battle with the
battleship, or the cruiser, in Dallas. That was where the thing ended. And it
wouldn't sell anywhere. And I went in the Army, and Buddy quit trying to market
it while I was in the Army. Well, when I came out of the Army, and I started
selling stories and all this stuff, and everybody started selling stories, Buddy
started writing again. He also took A Voice in Bitter Weeping, took all my parts
out of it, in other words, half the story, just by leaving the parts he'd
written in, and sold it first thing off to Galaxy. And, okay, and then he sold
it to Galaxy. Judy-Lynn Del Ray was the assistant editor at Galaxy, and had just
been hired by Ballantine Books as her SF editor. The last thing she saw before
she left Galaxy was our story, and she liked it. And she wrote it, and she said,
I like this story a lot. Do you think you could come up with an outline for a
novel? And if you do, I'll offer you so much and so much. And we went, oh, wow,
you know. So we said, not only do we have an outline, we sat down and, like,
continued the outline as the book goes, like in one night, we said, not only do
we have an outline, but the first 10,000 words are already written. You know,
and just like that. We just stuck my parts back in, the alternate chapters back
in. We had 10,000 words of the book already, and all we had to do was write
another 45,000 words, you know. And they wrote back, you know, they accepted the
outline, gave us a contract, and that was, you know, we wrote the book. It was a
stroke of luck. It was just a stroke of luck. We were, it was at the right place
at the right time, you know. Two weeks before or two weeks later, that wouldn't
have happened, probably. More with Howard Waldrop on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio
Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane. In 1976, a collaboration between Howard
Waldrop and Stephen Utley produced the Nebula finalist novelette Custer's Last
Jump. Custer's Last Jump is an immensely detailed alternate world story which
begins with the American Civil War. In this alternate history, both the Union
and the Confederacy have airplanes which figure heavily in the war. During the
conflict, the Oglala Sioux leader Crazy Horse manages to acquire and secrete a
few planes himself. In 1876, these planes are used in a climactic battle against
Custer. Waldrop explains how this story was written. Utley had always been a
Custer freak. He knew all about all that stuff. I'd always been an airplane
freak, so I knew all about the airplane stuff. And we started one night in 1972.
It was like November of 1972. We started playing Can You Top This? on a
typewriter. And so Utley wrote this section about part of the second part, the
Collier's article. He wrote about two pages of that, and he read it to me over
the phone. And about an hour later, I rang him back up and read the first three
pages of the part of the Smithsonian report about Crazy Horse's airplane. And we
just went crazy from there, you know? And like the story was written in like six
days or something like that. I did a tremendous amount of research in the time
between the time we started the story and the time we finished it, you know? One
of the things was it was written in the alternate. I wrote the airplane part.
Utley wrote the Collier's article. Steve wrote the Twain part because he'd
always been fascinated by Mark Twain. And then I wrote the Testament of Black
Man's Hand, you know, that Twain transcribes in the story. And then we both sat
down and wrote the bibliography together, you know, did all this stuff in the
bibliography. And it came out, I think it took about a week to write the story.
But it was because we, both of us knew certain parts, you know? You already had
done research in certain areas that we could write the story and use the other
research we did as we wrote it to finish it. But we did research, but we already
had a lot of research, too.
All of Waldrop's stories are characterized by a lot of details. This prompted us
to ask Waldrop how much research he does prior to his writing a story. It's like
everybody says, and I know it's true, I research too much. I research everything
too much. Every story I write, I research a whole bunch and then don't use half
of it, you know? Don't use a third of it, usually something like that. I like
certain research that I want to do on my own when I'm not sure what I'm doing.
So I read a whole lot about the whole subject. And a lot of that works its way
back into the story. When I know exactly what I want to do in a story, then I
get real specific and that research is not as much fun. You know, because you're
saying, I need to know exactly when or exactly what or something like that. You
know, and that's not because then you've got to look. Whereas if you don't know
anything, not anything, but you don't know much about the field, you can just go
and get everything on it and just start going through it and reading it and
coming across fascinating little nuggets and stuff like that to use, you know?
But I do too much research. I do way too much research for every story. And it's
like sometimes the research will take a month and writing a story will take two
days. You know, it's like... We asked Waldrop if he considers this extra research
to be wasted effort. It's never wasted. It's only wasteful in the sense that I
could possibly be doing the next thing down the line while I'm still even doing
the research on one thing. You know, I could already be through with the story
and have it. But I do the research and it just shows up in the story.
We'll have more with Howard Waldrop on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And Bill Vernon. The 1981 Nebula Award for Best Novelette
went to Howard Waldrop's The Ugly Chickens. Waldrop has had several works which
made the final ballot in the Nebula voting, but The Ugly Chickens is his first
winner. We asked him if he considers this his best work. The Terry to whom
Waldrop prefers is noted editor Terry Carr. I have not mixed feelings, but I had
no idea when I wrote Ugly Chickens how good it was or not. I hadn't written a
story for about six months when I wrote that. I was doing other stuff and I was
working on research on other things, and I hadn't written an actual story. So
when I finally wrote Ugly Chickens, I didn't know if it was any good or not. I
really didn't. I couldn't tell anymore. I'd worked on it so long. You know, I
did all this research for the thing. Like, I did six months of research for it.
It's way too long for a story. And then I wrote the story and I didn't know if
the story was any good or not. And then I sent it off to Terry. And, like, the
thing was that Terry at the time was taking a lot of medicine. He had wrenched
his back and he was taking a lot of medicine and reading for Universe at the
same time. Universe filled up. And he said, I'd like to take it, but Universe is
filled up and all this stuff. And I said, okay. And about that time, Marta
Randall called. You know, and said, hey, I just heard from Terry about the story
and I want it real bad. And will you take twice as much money for it? You know,
and I said, oh, sure, right. You know, so she ran down the hill and got the
story from Terry and brought, you know, and sent me a contract. And, like, two
nights later, I walk in the house and it's 12:30 at night and the phone rings.
And he says, Howard, this is Terry. And I could just see dollars flying out the
window. I knew exactly what was going to happen, you know. And, like, he had
gotten off his medicine. And one of the stories he had been promised wasn't
delivered. And the person said, I can't do it, you know. And he wanted the story
back real bad. And, like, he was trying, you know, he was trying politely to get
the story back for less money than Marta was going to pay me and all this kind
of stuff. Anyway, I had no idea whether, at the time, whether the story was any
good or it was just Marta and Terry were not functioning at their, you know, top
flight level or something. I don't know, but I always try to hope that the next
story I write or one down the line is going to be my best, you know. And there's
just no, you know. I like Ugly Chickens. It still holds up, I think, real well,
if that's what you mean. I went back and reread it about three months ago, and
it was still a good story, which is all you can hope for, because some of them
aren't, you know. Or not that they're not good, it's that they're not like you
remembered them or wanted them to be. The final 1983 Nebula Ballot featured a
Waldrop story, God's Hooks. It's based on the meeting between two monumental
literary figures, Izaak Walton and John Bunyan. And it's amazing that nobody had
stuck those together, and because they did, any time you look at a survey of
English literature, the two books that are unclassifiable, the only two
unclassifiable books, in other words, there were like biographies, and there
were like histories, and there were beginnings of novels, and there were poetry
and plays and all that. But the only two unclassifiable books they talk about
are Pilgrim's Progress and The Complete Angler. You know, those are two totally,
totally, you know, classical books, and they're not like any other books written
that century or before or since, you know. It amazed me that nobody had put the
two together. And the obvious way to put the two together was, you know, I was
sitting there one day and I said, I was doing research on Walton and Bunyan and
all this, and I said, Walton fishes in the slew of despond. You know, it's
obvious, you know, right? You know, it's just totally obvious, you know. And it
amazed me that nobody had done it before, especially a British writer. You know,
especially a British writer. There were lots of people who were capable of doing
that, you know. And nobody had done it, and it was amazing. More with Howard
Waldrop on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon. And Daryl Lane. Howard Waldrop's story, Mary Margaret Road
Grader, was a Nebula finalist short story in 1976. Centered in the desert
southwest, Mary Margaret Road Grader portrays a rather bleak future. Their
protagonists are American Indians, and they occasionally have get-togethers,
which are highlighted by contests involving vehicles, something akin to tractor
pulls. Waldrop told us a story just came to them in a flash. I'd always been
fascinated with Indians,
and the Mary Margaret Road Grader was another one of those stories, like Mono No
Aware. There are about three I've done that just came to me in a flash. I mean,
it was just... I'd done research on Indians for years. I'd taken a course in
college in American Indian literature
and things like that. But the story itself just came in a flash one morning,
early one morning, you know. And I wrote it like in a day, you know, the whole
thing, beginning to end, you know, and I knew exactly like it came to me, the
entire story. It's really amazing. It's really a rare thing, and like writers
usually have about, in their whole career, that happens about twice or three
times, you know, and I've used up two of mine. I know, I know, you know. It's
really nice when it happens. But just all the research I've done through the
years just tumbled out, you know, while I was writing the story. Here he
explains what made the story come to him. It was essentially, I guess, a lot of,
you know, a lot of stuff had just been running around in my mind for months and
months. And what triggered it was that I got up early one morning. I was
visiting a friend in Austin and sleeping on the couch, and I got up and I put on
Bridge Over Troubled Water by Simon and Garfunkel. And between the opening notes
and like the end of the first verse, the whole story just went, you know, and I
said, wow, you know, this is great. And I guess it was, I mean, if you go back
and if you listen to Bridge Over Troubled Water and you read the story, there's
no common element at all. It's just something in the, I guess, in the feel or
the mood of the song at the time that just brought all that out. 1983's Hugo
Finals include a Waldrop story, Ike at the Mike, which appeared in Omni. This
story has an interesting background. Me and Lee were watching The Heroes of Rock
and Roll, Volume 2 or whatever it was, and they did like a 30-second bit at the
end showing the two heroes of the 50s, which were Elvis Presley and Dwight David
Eisenhower, and it just showed clips from both their lives, you know, right? And
I said, wow, you know, a world where Ike is the musician and Elvis is the
politician, you know? And I tried to give the story to Chad Oliver and Louis
Shiner. They wanted to collaborate at the time. And I tried to give the story to
them. And I said, okay, because Chad's a jazz music, you know, fan, has been
from way back, and Lou knows everything there is to know about Presley. He wrote
a book on Presley at one time. And I tried to just give them the idea. I said,
look, Ike is a jazz musician, Presley's a politician. Come on. You know, do the
story, send it off, make a lot of money, you know? Right? And he said, we just
can't get past the idea of Ike as a musician. You know, they just couldn't do
it. They just couldn't force themselves. You know, I mean, Chad is too close to
jazz to desecrate it like that. And I guess Lou is too close to Presley to, you
know, see the possibilities in politics for Presley. But once they wouldn't take
it, I said, well, hell, I'm going to have to write it myself, you know? So I sat
down and wrote it, you know? It's like you, it's just one of those ideas that
bothers you until you write it, you know? I mean, and once I knew I had to write
it, then I sat down and I did just enough research on Ike and just enough on
Presley to know about how they would be probably about it and wrote the story.
Howard Waldrop's stories will certainly grace Hugo and Nebula ballots for many
years to come.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.